>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Let's
talk about a brief history of .NET
I do wanna keep it brief, but
I do feel like it's important to know.
So, .NET was in was roughly released,
I think 2000-2001, so
about a quarter century ago,
25 years, decent bit of time.
So let's talk about its evolution.
So, at the time, Microsoft was investing
in Java, and I don't know the whole story,
I don't know the nuance of this story, but
Sun Microsystems took umbrage with that
and sued Microsoft and said, no,
we don't like your implementation of Java.
So part of that settlement included
removing Java from all of their Windows
installations.
It used to be bundled with Windows,
a Java runtime, and
now it's not as part of that settlement.
So Microsoft needed, because Java
was gaining traction in the market.
Microsoft wanted and needed its own high
level language to compete with Java.
So in the early days,
2000-2001 with the first release of
Visual Studio.NET,
is what it was called back then.
We got C# and VB.NET and
what's called the .NET Framework.
So I try to avoid using the term .NET
Framework simply because I think
it's a loaded term because it
usually means .NET in Windows.
And .NET Framework is still
kept up to date by Microsoft.
But it's very akin to what I would call
the core libraries of .NET Core now
branded typically is just .NET.
But I hear them used interchangeably
because the branding has been has shifted
quite strangely over the last five years,
as Microsoft has tried to,
like clarify what .NET means.
But .NET Framework,
the really important thing to know is that
it's akin to the core libraries today.
All the core functionality,
make an HTTP request, reading files,
that kind of thing.
So the first besides console apps,
which we will be mostly hanging out in
console apps for
the purposes of this workshop,
what they introduced was WinForms for
.NET and WebForms.
WebForms was a old is
definitely shown its age.
It is an abstraction over,
it was meant to bridge the gap from
Win forms developers to the web.
I think it accomplished that goal.
I couldn't tell you at what cost.
I can tell you, though,
that I still work on WebForms app.
I don't, but
by my company does occasionally.
So WebForms is still relevant in
that there's still a ton of code.
Same thing with financial institutions and
COBOL, like it's not gonna go anyway.
They're not gonna go away anytime soon.
But there were some challenges, right?
Back in the day of .NET,
it was Windows only.
That was like probably its biggest thing
is that you couldn't run it on Linux,
you couldn't run it on Mac.
It was purely Windows only.
It was also closed source.
It was actually source available.
You could browse the source code, but
the development of the product
was all done behind closed doors.
So as part of being a Microsoft MVP,
you get to go once a year to this
thing called the MVP Summit.
And back 20 years ago,
you were getting peeks at products and
product changes that were happening
that wouldn't happen for several months.
Nowadays, you're getting told mostly
about stuff that's gonna be happening in
the next little bit while
might be the next quarter, but
most of the development
is done out in the open.
That wasn't the case for
Microsoft 25 years ago, and
it's still paying the price for this,
the perception price, I should say,
because as I mentioned, I get asked all
the time, it .NET closed, is it open?
It's definitely open source, definitely
cross platform, definitely developed out
in the open, and as I mentioned, lack of
transparency in development processes.
There was a project called mono,
pronounced mono because it's Spanish for
monkey.
A lot of people just call it mono.
And it was aimed to be there was
a movement back in the early days of .NET
called alt.NET.
And they were like we
want .NET not on Windows.
We want .NET to be cross-platform.
So this was meant to be
an implementation that allowed .NET
to run on embedded system.
So it was a reimplementation of
a lot of the core libraries and
the features of .NET.
And I think that the Mono project probably
heavily influenced Microsoft long term
into investing in what we now
know is the .NET platform today,
which is out in the open.
So this was not a Microsoft
sponsored project.
Microsoft, I don't know if the word
tolerate is a good word for
it, but they let it go.
But it's actually still used today for
some things.
It's used in the Unity game engine, for
example, as their scripting language.
It's all powered by Mono so .NET Core
was introduced about ten years ago.
There was a technology called Silverlight
that was retired, much to the chagrin of
many .NET developers out there, but the
machinations of that, the implementation
of .NET for that platform
eventually evolved into .NET Core.
It's one of the worst kept secrets.
And sometimes you see .NET developers,
they're hanging around the bar and
it's like, you know that .NET Core
came from Silverlight, right?
It's like, yeah, everybody knows that now.
But once they announced this,
it was groundbreaking.
Cross-platform by design,
fully open source.
So everything is
developed in the open,
everything is developed transparently, you
will see references to GitHub issues about
why Microsoft makes certain decisions
which I think are really relevant.
There are some things that they won't do
and I'll show you and they'll show you why
it is, and they'll tell you why it is and
they'll they'll tell you in GitHub.
So you can see the issue you can log it,
and you'll see a couple of links here and
there in my course about that.
And then, like I said,
community involvement through Github.
There's people suggesting
language features.
They're writing specs for
features to be added to the language or
improving the existing code base, right?
So it's pretty amazing to see kind of all
of the things that have been done in .NET.
And it really kind of set the stage for
its current success and popularity in
the development world .NET is growing.
I think people are adopting it.
And I have to say that it's on
the strength of making all of the right
decisions about developing
the product in the open.